README.md, before:

<div id="top"></div>
<!--
*** Thanks for checking out the Best-README-Template. If you have a suggestion
*** that would make this better, please fork the repo and create a pull request
*** or simply open an issue with the tag "enhancement".
*** Don't forget to give the project a star!
*** Thanks again! Now go create something AMAZING! :D
-->



<!-- PROJECT SHIELDS -->
<!--
*** I'm using markdown "reference style" links for readability.
*** Reference links are enclosed in brackets [ ] instead of parentheses ( ).
*** See the bottom of this document for the declaration of the reference variables
*** for contributors-url, forks-url, etc. This is an optional, concise syntax you may use.
*** https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#reference-style-links
-->
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache_2.0-blue.svg)](https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT/blob/main/LICENSE)



<!-- ABOUT THE PROJECT -->
## What is PyFPT?

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT/blob/main/docs/images/stochastic_effects.png?raw=true" width="500"/>
</p>

PyFPT is Python/Cython package to run first-passage time (FPT) simulations using importance sampling.

This package will let you numerically investigate the tail of the probability density for first passage times in the number of e-folds for a potential in slow-roll stochastic inflation inflation.

The tail of the probability density is investiated using the method of [importance sampling](https://arxiv.org/abs/nucl-th/9809075), where a bias increases the probability of large FPTs, resulting in a sample distribution, which are then weighted to reproduce the rare events of the target distribution. This allows very rare events (normally need supercomputers) to be simulate efficiently with just your laptop!

This package also comes with functionality to compare the numerical results with analytical expectations.

<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>

## Documentation
You can find the [latest documentation](https://pyfpt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) on PyFPT's ReadTheDocs page.

## Requirements

The following packages are required to run PyFPT

* [Cython](https://cython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/src/quickstart/install.html)
* [NumPy](https://numpy.org/install/)
* [SciPy](https://scipy.org/install/)
* [matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/stable/users/installing/index.html)
* [mpmath](https://mpmath.org/doc/current/setup.html)
* [pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/getting_started/install.html)

Many of which are included common Python distributions like [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/products/distribution). You can check which packages you already have installed with `pip list`

<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- GETTING STARTED -->
## Getting Started

### User Guide

The [documentation](https://pyfpt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) contains a [user guide](https://pyfpt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/getting_started.html), whose code you can run yourself as interactive [Jupyter notebook](https://jupyter.org/install) by [downloading](https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT/tree/main/User%20guides) them.


### Installation

The package can be installed easily by using the following command
```sh
pip install PyFPT
```
in the command line whereever you have Python installed.

You can also clone the PyFPT repository

```sh
git clone https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT.git
```
to work on it locally. This would require compling the Cython code (the `.pyx` files) locally as well.

<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- USAGE EXAMPLES -->
### Example Results

The PyFPT package can be used to investigate far into the tail of the probability density (down to 10^-34 and beyond!)

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT/blob/main/docs/images/overlap_plot_m_0.001_bias_range_log_0.0_to_4.0_phi_UV_100.0phi_i_for_docs.png?raw=true" width="500"/>
</p>

Or even deviations from Gaussianity!

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT/blob/main/docs/images/publishable_error_bar_IS_near_10_dN_0.002_m_0.1_phi_UV_1.0phi_i_bias_3_iters_198234_bin_size_400_for_docs.png?raw=true" width="500"/>
</p>


See the [user guides](https://pyfpt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/getting_started.html) for details on how you can make these figures yourself!


<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- ROADMAP -->
## Roadmap

- [x] Simulate first-passage times of slow-roll inflation
- [x] Use importance sampling to investigate rare realisations
- [ ] Make general, for any Langevin equation
- [ ] Add multi-dimensionality
    - [ ] Add the acceleration of the field
    - [ ] Add more sophisticated noise models

See the [open issues](https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT/issues) for a full of known issues.

<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- CONTRIBUTING -->
## Contributing

If you have a suggestion that would make this better, please fork the repo and create a pull request. You can also simply open an issue with the tag "enhancement".

1. Fork the Project
2. Create your Feature Branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your Changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the Branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

And we will review your request!

<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>

## Bugs
This is the initial release of PyFPT, so it is expected there will be some minor bugs. Feel free to either report by rasing an [Issue](https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT/issues) on Github, emialingjoseph.jackson@port.ac.uk or fork the repository with your fix. 

Your is very much appreciated! 



<!-- LICENSE -->
## License

Distributed under an Apache-2.0 License. See `LICENSE.txt` for more information.

<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- CONTACT -->
## Contact

Joe Jackson  - joseph.jackson@port.ac.uk

Project Link: [https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT](https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT)

<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- ACKNOWLEDGMENTS -->
## Acknowledgments

We would like the following contributors to PyFPT, be it through phsyical understanding of first-passage time processes or help developing the package!

#### The Physics

* David Wands
* Vincent Vennin
* Kazuya Koyama
* Hooshyar Assadullahi

#### Package Development

* Coleman Krawczyk
* Ian Harry

#### Resources

The following resoucres were instrumental in developing the project into a package usable by the community:

* [Sphinx Guide](https://techwritingmatters.com/documenting-with-sphinx-tutorial-part-1-setting-up)
* [Autodoc](https://eikonomega.medium.com/getting-started-with-sphinx-autodoc-part-1-2cebbbca5365)
* [Package Development](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/packaging-projects/)
* [README.md](https://github.com/othneildrew/Best-README-Template)

<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- MARKDOWN LINKS & IMAGES -->
<!-- https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#reference-style-links -->
[contributors-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/contributors/othneildrew/Best-README-Template.svg?style=for-the-badge
[contributors-url]: https://github.com/othneildrew/Best-README-Template/graphs/contributors
[forks-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/forks/othneildrew/Best-README-Template.svg?style=for-the-badge
[forks-url]: https://github.com/othneildrew/Best-README-Template/network/members
[stars-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/stars/othneildrew/Best-README-Template.svg?style=for-the-badge
[stars-url]: https://github.com/othneildrew/Best-README-Template/stargazers
[issues-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/issues/othneildrew/Best-README-Template.svg?style=for-the-badge
[issues-url]: https://github.com/othneildrew/Best-README-Template/issues
[license-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/license/othneildrew/Best-README-Template.svg?style=for-the-badge
[license-url]: https://github.com/othneildrew/Best-README-Template/blob/master/LICENSE.txt
[linkedin-shield]: https://img.shields.io/badge/-LinkedIn-black.svg?style=for-the-badge&logo=linkedin&colorB=555
[linkedin-url]: https://linkedin.com/in/othneildrew
[product-screenshot]: images/screenshot.png

Commit message:

Upated to reflect no Windows support

README.md, after:

<div id="top"></div>
<!--
*** Thanks for checking out the Best-README-Template. If you have a suggestion
*** that would make this better, please fork the repo and create a pull request
*** or simply open an issue with the tag "enhancement".
*** Don't forget to give the project a star!
*** Thanks again! Now go create something AMAZING! :D
-->



<!-- PROJECT SHIELDS -->
<!--
*** I'm using markdown "reference style" links for readability.
*** Reference links are enclosed in brackets [ ] instead of parentheses ( ).
*** See the bottom of this document for the declaration of the reference variables
*** for contributors-url, forks-url, etc. This is an optional, concise syntax you may use.
*** https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#reference-style-links
-->
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache_2.0-blue.svg)](https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT/blob/main/LICENSE)



<!-- ABOUT THE PROJECT -->
## What is PyFPT?

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT/blob/main/docs/images/stochastic_effects.png?raw=true" width="500"/>
</p>

PyFPT is Python/Cython package to run first-passage time (FPT) simulations using importance sampling.

This package will let you numerically investigate the tail of the probability density for first passage times in the number of e-folds for a potential in slow-roll stochastic inflation inflation.

The tail of the probability density is investiated using the method of [importance sampling](https://arxiv.org/abs/nucl-th/9809075), where a bias increases the probability of large FPTs, resulting in a sample distribution, which are then weighted to reproduce the rare events of the target distribution. This allows very rare events (normally need supercomputers) to be simulate efficiently with just your laptop!

This package also comes with functionality to compare the numerical results with analytical expectations.

<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>

## Documentation
You can find the [latest documentation](https://pyfpt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) on PyFPT's ReadTheDocs page.

## Requirements

### Operating System

As PyFPT uses [Cython](https://cython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/src/quickstart/install.html) to optimise the stochastic simulations, a C-compilier is required for installation. Therefore, PyFPT does not currently run (future releases hope to address this issue) on Windows directly. Windows uses can either install PyFPT on a virtual machine or use a cloud based service such as [SciServer](https://www.sciserver.org/). 


Mac and Linux user should be able to directly install PyFPT, as these operating systems have a C-compilier.

### Packages
The following packages are required to run PyFPT

* [Cython](https://cython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/src/quickstart/install.html)
* [NumPy](https://numpy.org/install/)
* [SciPy](https://scipy.org/install/)
* [matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/stable/users/installing/index.html)
* [mpmath](https://mpmath.org/doc/current/setup.html)
* [pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/getting_started/install.html)

Many of which are included common Python distributions like [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/products/distribution). You can check which packages you already have installed with `pip list`

<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- GETTING STARTED -->
## Getting Started

### User Guide

The [documentation](https://pyfpt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) contains a [user guide](https://pyfpt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/getting_started.html), whose code you can run yourself as interactive [Jupyter notebook](https://jupyter.org/install) by [downloading](https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT/tree/main/User%20guides) them.


### Installation

The package can be installed easily by using the following command
```sh
pip install PyFPT
```
in the command line whereever you have Python installed.

You can also clone the PyFPT repository

```sh
git clone https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT.git
```
to work on it locally. This would require compling the Cython code (the `.pyx` files) locally as well.

<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- USAGE EXAMPLES -->
### Example Results

The PyFPT package can be used to investigate far into the tail of the probability density (down to 10^-34 and beyond!)

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT/blob/main/docs/images/overlap_plot_m_0.001_bias_range_log_0.0_to_4.0_phi_UV_100.0phi_i_for_docs.png?raw=true" width="500"/>
</p>

Or even deviations from Gaussianity!

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT/blob/main/docs/images/publishable_error_bar_IS_near_10_dN_0.002_m_0.1_phi_UV_1.0phi_i_bias_3_iters_198234_bin_size_400_for_docs.png?raw=true" width="500"/>
</p>


See the [user guides](https://pyfpt.readthedocs.io/en/latest/getting_started.html) for details on how you can make these figures yourself!


<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- ROADMAP -->
## Roadmap

- [x] Simulate first-passage times of slow-roll inflation
- [x] Use importance sampling to investigate rare realisations
- [ ] Make general, for any 1D Langevin equation
- [ ] Add multi-dimensionality
    - [ ] Add the acceleration of the field
    - [ ] Add more sophisticated noise models

See the [open issues](https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT/issues) for a full of known issues.

<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- CONTRIBUTING -->
## Contributing

If you have a suggestion that would make this better, please fork the repo and create a pull request. You can also simply open an issue with the tag "enhancement".

1. Fork the Project
2. Create your Feature Branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your Changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the Branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

And we will review your request!

<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>

## Bugs
This is the initial release of PyFPT, so it is expected there will be some minor bugs. Feel free to either report by rasing an [Issue](https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT/issues) on Github, emailing joseph.jackson@port.ac.uk or fork the repository with your fix. 

Your is very much appreciated! 



<!-- LICENSE -->
## License

Distributed under an Apache-2.0 License. See `LICENSE.txt` for more information.

<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- CONTACT -->
## Contact

Joe Jackson  - joseph.jackson@port.ac.uk

Project Link: [https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT](https://github.com/Jacks0nJ/PyFPT)

<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- ACKNOWLEDGMENTS -->
## Acknowledgments

We would like the following contributors to PyFPT, be it through phsyical understanding of first-passage time processes or help developing the package!

#### The Physics

* David Wands
* Vincent Vennin
* Kazuya Koyama
* Hooshyar Assadullahi

#### Package Development

* Coleman Krawczyk
* Ian Harry

#### Resources

The following resoucres were instrumental in developing the project into a package usable by the community:

* [Sphinx Guide](https://techwritingmatters.com/documenting-with-sphinx-tutorial-part-1-setting-up)
* [Autodoc](https://eikonomega.medium.com/getting-started-with-sphinx-autodoc-part-1-2cebbbca5365)
* [Package Development](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/packaging-projects/)
* [README.md](https://github.com/othneildrew/Best-README-Template)

<p align="right">(<a href="#top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- MARKDOWN LINKS & IMAGES -->
<!-- https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#reference-style-links -->
[contributors-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/contributors/othneildrew/Best-README-Template.svg?style=for-the-badge
[contributors-url]: https://github.com/othneildrew/Best-README-Template/graphs/contributors
[forks-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/forks/othneildrew/Best-README-Template.svg?style=for-the-badge
[forks-url]: https://github.com/othneildrew/Best-README-Template/network/members
[stars-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/stars/othneildrew/Best-README-Template.svg?style=for-the-badge
[stars-url]: https://github.com/othneildrew/Best-README-Template/stargazers
[issues-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/issues/othneildrew/Best-README-Template.svg?style=for-the-badge
[issues-url]: https://github.com/othneildrew/Best-README-Template/issues
[license-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/license/othneildrew/Best-README-Template.svg?style=for-the-badge
[license-url]: https://github.com/othneildrew/Best-README-Template/blob/master/LICENSE.txt
[linkedin-shield]: https://img.shields.io/badge/-LinkedIn-black.svg?style=for-the-badge&logo=linkedin&colorB=555
[linkedin-url]: https://linkedin.com/in/othneildrew
[product-screenshot]: images/screenshot.png
